With our responsive breakpoints now defined,
let's start to implement them in media queries
in our Sass code so that we can start
making the page responsive.
In this lecture, you're gonna learn how to use
a powerful Sass mixing to write all our media queries
with one single mixing, and in order to do that,
you'll learn how to use the content and if Sass directives.
And finally, we're gonna take advantage
of the Chrome DevTools to check out our media queries
and responsive designs as we code.
The traditional way that many people,
and especially beginners I think,
use the right media queries was to simply create another
CSS file, and then in there, simply write a big media query.
Something like this, media then max-width,
600 pixels, for example, and then in here,
we would write our styles like html and body
and then all of these other components that we have here.
All of these, for example, we would then copy them
and put them here in our huge media query
and we would have one media query per breakpoint basically.
But what if there is a better way?
What if we could simply add the media query
into each of our selector?
It would make our life a lot easier, right?
For example, imagine that we want
to make our story responsive.
Imagine we want to make this one responsive.
It would be really useful to simply add a media query,
for example, in here, and then do it that way, right?
For example, media query and then max-width 600, like this,
and with Sass, we can actually do it this way.
If you would now go ahead and write something in here,
for example, with 50% or something like that,
and this is just a test, okay?
I'm just testing and showing you stuff for now.
If you would write it like this
and then open our compiled file here,
which I think we haven't ever opened up until this point.
This is our compiled CSS file.
All of the CSS that we wrote in the last section is in here.
So, you wrote an impressive, let's take a look.
Well, all of the CSS code, so you wrote an impressive
765 lines of this compressed CSS code.
This is really a lot.
But what I was actually looking for here
was the code about the story, so let's take a look.
Ah, here it is.
Here's the code that I just wrote.
This is similar to what I showed you
in the beginning to this one here,
where we have a media query and then in there our selector
and then the declaration block.
But of course, this here is much simpler
because we're not repeating the selector.
We just say that at this max-width here, for example,
we want the width to change to 50%
and so that makes it a lot easier.
But again, I'm going to delete this now
because this was just for testing purposes.
So, to show you a better way,
here we could actually do something similar,
something like this.
Now, instead of repeating the selector here,
we could simply go ahead and write font-size,
50% or something, okay?
That will make our life a lot easier.
Then go ahead, write the next one in here.
In the end, we would end up with a lot
of media queries like this, and that's not a problem at all.
Having hundreds of these small media queries
or one big one is not really a problem, okay?
So, don't worry about that one.
If you think about it, imagine you would have to write
this here, all of this code here, in all of your selectors,
in all of these files, in all of the elements
that you selected and you want to change,
you would always have to write this media query.
That would be a lot of work.
Even worse, imagine that someday you would decide
to just change your breakpoints, then you would have
to go back and change all of these numbers.
So, there is an even better way than this.
What we're going to do is to write a mixing,
and basically the mixing will do this part here for us.
So, we'll write a mixing, and that mixing will then paste,
basically, will insert this code for us.
Let's try to do that,
because that will be the best solution of all.
So, our mixings file.
This is the clear fix and absolute centering
that we already have, and we're now going to add
something like a media query manager.
That's how I like to call it.
Just to recap our last lecture, let's write,
actually, our breakpoint in here,
so, opening some comments here.
The range, as we just defined in the last lecture,
were from zero to 600 pixel, we had the phone.
Then, from 600 to 900, we had the tablet in portrait mode.
And this is just so we don't forget it, okay?
From 900 to 1200, we had our tablet in landscape.
Align this all nicely.
And then, from 1800 up, 1800 plus,
we had something for big screens, so big desktop.
Basically, everything that's in between here,
from 1200 going to 1800, is where our normal styles apply.
Remember that this is basically a desktop first approach,
where our normal styles that we have written so far,
outside of the media queries, are for the desktop.
Basically, these are the styles that apply
to this 1200 to 1800 pixel range.
We're then going to write max-width media queries
for these three ranges here,
and the min-width media query for this range.
You will see how in a second.
Let's then write a mixing.
I'm gonna call it respond,
and let's say I want one for the phone.
Then, what I'm going to do is
to simply write the media query in here,
so max-width 600 pixels,
and then in here should go, of course, the content.
Now, how do we actually do that?
How do we know that, for example, that the code that
we write here, so let's go back to what we had before.
How do we actually parse this font-size,
50%, into the mixing?
Well, there's something called the content directive.
So, it's this one.
So, the content.
This basically allows us to parse
a block of code into a mixing.
We can now use that mixing, respond phone.
In here, we want respond-phone
and then a font-size of 50%.
This here is basically the content
that I parsed into the mixing.
Here, of course, I need the include.
Remember that when we first talked about mixings,
I sometimes used to parse arguments into it,
and then I used the parenthesis in order to parse
a value into a mixing, but this is different.
Here, we can parse an entire block of code,
basically, into the mixing.
We can now go ahead and add more lines in here,
if you wanted, and then all of that content
would be called here @content, okay?
So, the content we wrote there will then be put in here
and then a mixing will paste, will include this entire
code here, this media query already with the content inside.
Let's compile this, and it actually is already compiled,
so let's take a look if this here is the same than this,
and it should be, right?
Let's open this one again.
It should be somewhere here near the top.
And here we go.
So, you see, the first media query is this one here,
ending here, and then this one here,
which is the exact same thing, okay?
Does that make sense?
We can do even better than this.
I'm going in steps here and showing you the improvements
that we do instead of just showing you the final solution.
I think it's more logical for you and it's better
if you really understand where these things come from.
We have a mixing called respond-phone.
Then, we would have to have a mixing called
respond-tablet-portrait and one for respond-tablet-landscape
and so on and so forth, but that's not what we want.
We just want one huge mixing
which covers all of these cases.
How could we do that?
Well, that's why I actually called it media query manager,
because that's the mixing that we're gonna write.
This is the first one, and I'm gonna leave it here for now
just for testing purposes, and I'm gonna create a new one.
So, mixing, and this one, I will just call it respond.
The difference is that into this one,
we are going to parse a breakpoint,
a breakpoint in form of a name.
The names of the breakpoints that I wanna parse into here,
let's actually write them out here as well.
Basically, documenting this mix point,
and that's a good practice.
So, breakpoint argument choices.
The first one, I'm simply going to call phone.
Then, we will have one breakpoint called tab-port.
We could call it tablet portrait, but I don't wanna write
all that text each time I'm using this mixing,
and so I just use a small name, just tab-port.
And then, tab-land for the tablet landscape.
And finally, big-desktop.
These are the names.
Alright, and how do we do that now?
Well, we already saw the content directive,
but there's another directive in Sass
that we didn't talk about yet, and that's the if directive.
This is now similar to more advanced programming.
I said that I wouldn't cover the if directive in the course,
but actually, I need it right now.
So, what is the if directive?
If you're familiar with some programming language
like JavaScript or something,
then you already know what the if statement is.
What an if does is basically, it makes a test,
and if the result of this test
is true then something happens.
But it's easier to actually show it to you in practice.
If the breakpoint is phone then we want something to happen.
And what we want to happen comes here
in these curly braces, in this block here.
And that's actually it.
Let me recap that.
We are going to call this mixing here,
we're going to include it, and we will parse a breakpoint.
If that breakpoint that we parse in here is called phone,
then what we want to happen is this.
What we want to happen is this exact media query
that we had before.
For the phone, we have 600 pixels, so that's the media query
that we want to include in that case.
Let's not actually test this as well.
Again, I'm gonna do it here.
This time it looks a bit different.
Include, respond, and now with this argument,
I can say that I want the media query for the phone
with a font-size of 50%.
Let's save this and that will compile the code.
So, let's check it out.
And indeed, here it is.
This is the first one, and this is the second one,
and they are completely identical, exactly the same,
meaning that this actually works.
We now have this mixing which allows us
to parse simply the word phone in there
and then it will figure out which media query it will do.
With that in mind, we can now extend this
to all our four breakpoints.
We have tab-port, we have tab-landscape,
and we have big-desktop.
Now, these breakpoints here, well,
the first one is 600 as we know,
so everything from zero to 600 is for the phone.
Max-width, again, asks if the width is less than 600 pixels.
Remember that from the last lecture?
Okay, so for tab-port, we then have 900,
so for all the width which are less than 900 pixels.
Then for the tablet landscape, we have 1200 pixels,
so this would apply to all the width
that are smaller than 1200, smaller or equal to 1200.
And then, we have a media query for the big desktop.
When do we want this to happen?
Well, we want 1800 plus, so we want this to happen
when a width is larger than 1800.
So, as we learned in the last lecture,
this is a min-width media query,
so the minimum width at which this will occur is 1800 pixels
and if it's more, it will happen, and if it's less,
then it's not going to happen.
That is our media query manager, as I like to call it.
Just to demonstrate to you that this actually works,
let's now include a bunch of these in here.
All of them, actually.
We have the phone, we have tablet-port,
we have tab-land, and we have big-desktop.
Let's just change the numbers here.
50, 60, 70, and 80.
Let's check that out again, and indeed, here it is.
It's a bit weird with all the spacing,
so let's give it some spacing to see it better.
But actually, that's what we wrote.
We have the media query just for the HTML
with font size 50% for max-width 600 pixels.
Then we have for 900 pixels with 60%,
1200 pixels, 70, and 1800 pixels min-width 80%.
That's fantastic, that's a huge step forward
over the old way of writing the media queries
that I explained to you before.
This is really much better than what we had.
Just one other thing that I have to change here
is actually the pixel unit here.
We've been talking about pixels here all this time now,
but such as in the rest of the page, we're actually not
gonna use pixels in the media queries here.
That's because if the user changes the default font size
in the browser, then the media queries
would not be affected by that.
However, we want them to be affected, so just like before,
we use pixels simply to understand what's going on here,
but we then use a relative unit
that is in the end going to convert to pixel.
About rems and ems, there's an important particularity
about them in media queries.
That's because ems and rems in media queries,
they are not affected by a root font size setting,
by this setting here.
They are simply not affected by what we do here
in the root font size setting.
What that means is that one rem or one em
in a media query is always just equal to the font size
which is coming from the browser,
and that's by default 16 pixels,
but if the user changes it to 20 pixels,
then it will be 20 pixels no matter what we have
in our base font definition.
What we're going to use here is ems and not rems,
because rems fail to work as intended
in some of the browsers.
There's been some experiments done by people who understand
a lot of all of this, and the conclusion basically
is that ems are the best option for media queries.
That's what we're going to do here.
Keeping in mind that one em is 16 pixels,
let's now convert all of these here.
Basically, we say 600 divided by 16.
So, we end up with 37.5em.
37.5em, but just so we know what it actually is,
let's write it here in a comment.
So, 600 pixels, and the same here of course,
so that when we come here and wanna check it out,
then we know what we're actually looking at, right?
The same logic with 900, so 56.25.
56.25em, then 1200 divided by 16 is 75.
And finally, 1800 divided by 16 is 112.5.
Alright, and that's it.
This will be converted to pixels and will be adopted
to the font size that the user set for the browser.
So, it's a more accessible solution here like this
instead of using the pixels.
Our mixing or breakpoint manager here is now completed.
We can go ahead and delete this one here and here.
This as well, so just one huge comment here
for this entire mixing.
We can close it and we actually never again
have to look at this.
Now we're ready to just use it.
Let's actually do that for the first time here
for the default font size, which translates to one rem,
and so basically, this font size here
is what defines the size of our entire layout.
Remember in the beginning when we first started using rem.
I told you that by using rem, we will make the entire layout
of the webpage dependent on the font size,
and that's a good thing because now, in responsive design,
we can simply change the font size here
and then all of these measurements in rem, all of them
will scale up or down according to this font size.
That's a huge, huge advantage and time saver.
Otherwise, if we had everything in pixels,
we would now go ahead and change all of these pixels
to smaller numbers, but with this trick,
we simply need to increase or decrease the font size here,
and then the design will basically shrink.
That will, of course, not be enough to make
the page responsive, so there's a lot of stuff
we will have to adjust later on,
but it's a huge step already and a huge time saver.
Let's now define some font sizes for these
four media queries, for these for breakpoints.
At the default viewport width,
one rem is, of course, 10 pixels.
One rem equals 10 pixels.
That's a calculation we've been doing right in the beginning
where we said that the 10 pixels that we want
divided by the default 16 pixels equals 62.5%.
Remember that part?
Let's now change all of that in the media queries.
Imagine that for the landscape tablet,
I want one rem to be eight.
One rem should be eight pixels, meaning that I have to do
eight by 16, which is 50%.
I'm going from 65% to 50% and just like that,
one rem is no longer 10 pixels, but eight pixels.
If I then take a look at something here,
like maybe this button here.
We have a padding of four rem here,
which used to be 40 pixels at our default size,
but then at a tablet it will simply become four times eight.
So, four times eight is 32 pixels and no longer 40.
Everything will decrease as a result of this.
Maybe here in the portrait I want one rem to be nine pixels.
Well, actually, that doesn't make much sense
because the landscape here is bigger
and so this font size should be bigger here.
Let's actually put this one here.
This is where we want 50%, and here I want it
to be nine pixels, so nine divided by 16,
and that's 56.25%, so 56.25%.
Then when we have a really big screen,
maybe I want one rem to be equal to 12 pixels,
so scaling the entire design up.
Now, we do 12 by 16, so 12 by 16, and that's 75%.
I'm now increasing my entire design.
Here, about the phone, remember that this media query
asks the question if the width is smaller than 600, right?
But this next media query here asks the question
if the width is lower than 900.
Imagine that the width is 500,
and so it will still be less than 900, right?
500 is still less than 600, but of course,
also less than 900, so both of these
media queries would apply, and what that means
is that I don't really need this one, right?
If I have 50% in this one and in this one,
if they're the same, I don't need this one
because they will both apply, so one of them is unnecessary.
Let's simply remove the first one,
and that should now work as intended.
Let's take a look again at the compiled code here,
and yep, here we go.
The portrait tablet, the landscape tablet,
and the big desktop.
Now, it's finally time to take a look
at this in our final webpage.
What we're going to do is to actually use the DevTools here
instead of resizing the screen,
which isn't the best practice, I would say.
We have something here which is called
the toggle device toolbar.
If we click this, then we basically get
this responsive screen here.
We decrease this down here.
Okay, so we can do it here right inside
of these DevTools here.
Let's now really decrease and take a look
at what we have here.
Oh, you saw that?
Here, take a look.
Here is the 1200 breakpoint, and as I'm decreasing it now,
you see everything decreased a bit.
That's great, it means it's working.
Let's now get a bit closer to the next one, which is 900.
Well, this time nothing happened.
Why is that?
Let's take a look here.
I see that we have now two conflicting media queries here.
The one that applies is the 75%, and so of course,
I did it wrong here.
It should be the other way around,
because it's the same logic as I explained before.
Each time that the tablet portrait media queries apply,
the tablet landscape does as well.
Both of them here apply, so these two,
and then the last one will be used.
But that's not what I want.
I just need to put them the other way around.
This one here now asks,
width less than 900.
Remember, this one here asks width less than 600.
Imagine that we have a 500 pixel viewpoint width.
The first one here would apply, and of course,
the second one would apply as well,
so they would still be conflicting,
but the difference is that the smaller media query,
the one for the tablet portrait is the one that is applying.
That is exactly what I want
when the screen is just 500 pixels.
I don't want the larger media query to apply,
but the smaller one, and so this is the order
in which we have to put the media queries.
Always the larger ones before the smaller ones.
This will bring me the behavior that I expected.
Now you see the change here, and here as well.
So, 50% is now the current font size.
You see that this is already working quite well, right?
As we decrease the screen,
this keeps decreasing here as well.
You can actually put the other one here as well
for the phone, just to show it to you.
Let me just copy this one here, include phone.
Let's put it really small, just 30%, which will equal to
.3 times 16, so 4.8 pixels, basically.
One rem will be 4.8.
That's not what we want, of course,
and so I'm gonna delete it in a second.
But just to exemplify this here, I'll reload everything.
Now, as we approach 600,
you see that everything becomes really small now.
You see, even the button of course will reduce its size.
Okay, we made everything work.
We made this very nice breakpoint manager,
and we also used it for the first time, so that's great.
Let's get rid of this one here.
And here of course, this is not right.
It's 900 and 1200.
But that doesn't change the functionality, obviously.
Now, after this lecture, I want you to think about
this a little bit, to think about why we had to use this
order of the media queries and not the other one around.
I want you to really get a grasp for this material
so that we can then move on and really use it here
on the rest of the page.
Please go ahead and do that right now,
and I'll see you next time.